Getting enough sleep is essential for maintaining optimal health and well-being. Like exercise and a balanced diet, sleep may help prevent a range of health issues, including heart disease and depression.
Modern-day living in the United States and many other countries does not always embrace the necessity for adequate sleep. Yet, it is important that people make an effort to get enough sleep regularly.
The following are some of the many benefits health professionals associate with getting a good night’s rest.
1. Better memory and performance

A 2017 studyTrusted Source looked into the short and long-term health consequences of sleep disruption.

Researchers noted that sleep has links to several brain functions, including:

Memory: Sleep disruption may affect memory processing and formation.
Performance: People’s performance at work, school, and other settings is affected by sleep disruption. This includes focus, emotional reactivity, decision-making, risk-taking behavior, and judgment.
Cognition: By affecting stress hormones, sleep disruption may affect cognition.
A 2015 study in the Journal of Child Psychology and PsychiatryTrusted Sourceshowed that childrens sleep patterns could directly impact their behavior and academic performance.

2. Lower weight gain risk
The link between weight gain and obesity and short sleep patterns is unclear.

There have been several studies throughout the years that have linked obesity and poor sleep patterns.

A 2018 studyTrusted Source suggests that people who regularly sleep less than seven hours a night are more likely to have a higher body mass index (BMI) and develop obesity than those who sleep more.

Researchers suggested sleep deprivation is associated with higher levels of gherlin (the hunger hormone), salt retention and inflammatory markers. They also noted that decreased sleep results in increased fatigue, which may affect a person’s desire or ability to exercise and maintain a healthful lifestyle.

More research is needed to better understand the links between poor sleep and weight gain.

To discover more evidence-based information and resources on the science of healthy sleep, visit our dedicated hub.

3. Better calorie regulation
Similarly to gaining weight, there is evidence to suggest that getting a good’ night sleep can help a person’s body take in fewer calories.

For example, a 2022 clinical trial found that overweight adults who increased their sleep duration took in fewer calories compared with a control group.

The adults increased their sleep by 1.2 hours on average, and took in around 270 calories fewer than the control group. The researchers suggested that improving and maintaining healthy sleep duration could help with weight loss and obesity prevention.

4. Greater athletic performance
Adults need between 7 and 9 hours of sleep a night, but recent studies have suggested that athletes may need more.

Sleep is important for athletes and people participating in sport because the body heals during sleep. Other benefits include:

better endurance
more energy
better accuracy and reaction time
faster speed
better mental functioning
5. Lower risk of heart disease
One risk factor for heart disease is high blood pressure. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source, getting adequate rest each night allows the body’s blood pressure to regulate itself.

Getting a good night’s sleep can also reduce the chances of sleep-related conditions such as apnea and promote better overall heart health.


6. More emotional and social intelligence
Sleep has links to people’s emotional and social intelligence. Someone who does not get adequate sleep is more likely to have issues with recognizing other people’s emotions and expressions.

For example, a 2022 study looked into the relationship between sleep quality and duration and emotional intelligence.

477 participants were asked to complete questionnaires about sleep habits and emotional intelligence. People who routinely experienced higher quality sleep tended to perceive themselves as having better emotional intelligence, such as doing well in social interactions, maintaining relationships, feeling positive and controlling impulses.

7. Preventing depression
The association between sleep and mental health has been the subject of research for a long time. A 2016 meta-analysisTrusted Source concluded that insomnia is significantly associated with an increased risk of depression.

The review suggests that sleep loss may result in cognitive alterations that lead to depression risk.

Sleep disturbance may also impair emotional regulation and stability, as well as altering neural processes, which may all lead to symptoms of depression.

8. Lower inflammation
There is a link between getting adequate sleep and reducing inflammation in the body.

For example, a 2019 study found a significant positive association between greater sleep inconsistency and higher levels of inflammation, particularly in women.

The study suggested that inconsistent sleep, where a person goes to bed at inconsistent times or wakes up at different times each night, can disturb the body’s process of regulating inflammation during sleep.

9. Stronger immune system
Sleep helps the body repair, regenerate, and recover. The immune system is no exception to this relationship. Some research suggests that deep sleep is neccessaryTrusted Source for the body to repair itself and strengthen the immune system.

However, scientists still need to do further research into the exact mechanisms of sleep in regards to its impact on the body’s immune system.